How to create a professional resume
Follow these steps when drafting a resume for your next job application:
1. Choose the right format
A format is the style and order in which you display information on your resume. You can choose from three commonly used resume formats depending on which is right for you—chronological (or reverse-chronological), functional or a combination.
Chronological—A chronological resume puts the professional history section first and is a good option if you have a rich professional work history with no gaps in employment.
Functional—The functional resume format emphasizes the skills section and is a good option if you are switching careers or have gaps in your work history.
Combination—The combination resume format is a good option if you have some professional experience because it emphasizes both skills and work history equally.
2. Include your name and contact information
Your resume should begin with your name and contact information, including your professional email address and phone number. You have a choice about whether or not to include your mailing address. Your name should be highly visible at the top of your resume with a bolder or larger font than the rest of the document but no more than a 14-point size. You might also include a link to your online portfolio if your profession warrants it.
3. Tailor your resume for each position
Revising your resume to tailor it to each position you apply for is important. For each job, adjust the keywords in the skills section so that they are a great fit for what the employer needs. Be sure you change what's emphasized in the professional history and educational experiences sections to mirror what’s listed in the job description.
Related: How To Use Resume Samples
4. Add a resume summary or objective
After your contact information, you can include either a resume summary or an objective statement. An objective statement quickly explains your career goals and is a good choice for those with limited professional experience, such as recent college or high school graduates. A resume summary is a short statement that uses active language to describe your relevant work experience, skills and accomplishments.
Read more: 195 Action Verbs to Make Your Resume Stand Out
5. List your soft and hard skills
Take a moment to consider which skills make you a great fit for the job. Review the job description and highlight keywords that you have had proven success with in the past. Consider both hard (technical) and soft (interpersonal) skills, as well as transferable skills you can use when changing careers or industries. Create a skills section with the keywords that are relevant to the employer. List any required skills like certifications or licenses first. Since it's paired with the job description, this section needs to be customized for each job application.
Related: Hard Skills vs. Soft Skills: What's the Difference?
6. Detail your professional history
Write your professional history section in reverse-chronological order. Start with your most recent job and provide a short description, including the company name, month and year you started and left, your job title and a few key achievements during your time at the company. You might also include your relevant accomplishments or achievements during each job.
When listing your professional history, keep a few best practices in mind:
Use numbers to measure your impact when possible. Quantify your achievements whenever possible by including specific results to help employers understand your potential value to their company.
Example: “Developed new process for requesting supplies, reducing fulfillment time by 10%.”
Use keywords from the job description. As in the skills section, include keywords from the job description in your history section. For example, if the job description mentions the importance of meeting sales quotas, you could include information about how you’ve met or exceeded quotas in past roles.
Example: “Achieved goal of reaching 250% annual sales quota, winning sales MVP two quarters in a row.”
Be brief. Employers have mere seconds to review your resume, so keep your descriptions as concise and relevant as possible. Try removing filler words like “and” and “the.” Only list details or duties tied to key achievements instead of multiple lines describing your role.
Use action verbs. Make a stronger impact by using action verbs to describe your professional achievements. Some examples include “developed,” “saved,” “drove” and “managed.”
Follow the same process for other work experiences. If you do not have an extensive professional history, include internships and volunteer opportunities following the same format.
Related: How To Include Years of Experience on Your Resume
7. Include an education section
An education section will be especially valuable if you have limited work experience (such as recent college or high school graduates) or are transferring to a new industry. Include information such as:
Relevant coursework
Grade point average (if above 3.5)
Participation in relevant clubs or organizations
Leadership positions held
Awards, achievements or certifications
When writing your education section, include the institution's name, dates of attendance and degree or area of study. If you are applying to mid- or higher-level positions, you might remove all but the name of your school and dates of attendance to make room for more relevant professional experience on your resume.
If you have certifications or licenses relevant to the job description, include them in this section as well. To save space, you can leave off any credentials not directly related to the job requirements.
Related: Guide to Resumes for Older Workers (With Tips and Example)
8. Consider adding optional sections
If you have significant white space on your resume, consider adding an achievements or interests section. This can help supplement a shorter resume, especially for those with limited work and educational experience. Ensure the achievements and interests you list support your career goals and are relevant to potential employers.
9. Proofread your resume
Carefully review your resume for spelling, grammar and punctuation errors. Reading your resume backward can help you identify errors by presenting the words in a new order. You can also ask trusted friends, colleagues, professors and family members if they can review your resume. Third-party opinions can help reveal new information you might have overlooked.
If your resume is more than one page, look for ways to consolidate or shorten each section by removing filler words or extraneous information. A can help you proofread and consolidate your resume. Two pages may be acceptable if you are applying for high-level positions or industries like healthcare or academia. can help you proofread and consolidate your resume. Two pages may be acceptable if you are applying for high-level positions or industries like health care or academia.
Resume example
Here is an example of a resume following the combination resume format:
Robert Maeder
Tampa, Florida • 813-555-0199
robert.maeder@email.com
robertmaedergraphics.personalwebsite.com
Summary
A diligent, hardworking graphic designer with expertise in key industry-leading design tools and software.
Skills
Adobe Photoshop (expert level) • Adobe InDesign (expert level) • CorelDraw (intermediate level) • Self-motivated • Creative • Hardworking
Professional History
Next Up Press
Associate Graphic Designer, August 2019–Present
Created graphics for print and online publications
Worked collaboratively with editors to ensure accuracy and function of designs
Enhanced key software application skills to overcome unique challenges in print graphic design
Level 10 Designs
Intern, June 2018–June 2019
Utilized graphic design skills to create graphics for clients with a 98% satisfaction rate
Learned key skills for Adobe Suite of products
FSU University Newspaper
Graphic Designer, September 2016–May 2018
Designed graphics for online publication
Worked with writers and editors to design graphically-unique profiles
Utilized and developed Photoshop skills
Educational History
Florida State University
August 2012–May 2016
BFA, Animation and Digital Arts | 3.5 GPA